Christopher Nolan is a cinematic auteur, as a director, a writer, and a
 producer. He is not, however, a philosopher in the technical sense of the
 term that denotes professionals working in the academic discipline.
 Nevertheless, a volume entitled The Philosophy of Christopher Nolan is per
fectly appropriate as his films—spanning nearly twenty years from Dood
lebug (1997) through Interstellar (2014) and beyond—have provoked phil
osophical reflection among viewers who’ve found his films, to quote co
median John Oliver, more than “a little vague.” In this respect, Nolan is
 not all that different from the father of Western philosophy, Socrates (d.
 399 BCE), who styled himself a sort of “gadfly” whose function was to
 sting his fellow Athenians out of their intellectual complacency to ponder
 moral and other philosophical questions about which they’ve often taken
 for granted simple, patent conclusions. There are no simple solutions for
 complex problems.
 Let’s consider Nolan’s oeuvre chronologically. First, in Doodlebug, he
 challenges a hallmark of Western philosophy from Thomas Aquinas in
 the thirteenth century through Immanuel Kant in the eighteenth century
 that self-destruction is a fundamentally irrational desire. Although the
 protagonist in Doodlebug may indeed be irrational for wanting to squash
 himself, it’s not altogether clear that he might not have some reason for
 doing so; or, at the very least, his perhaps irrational action might bespeak
 a fundamental flaw of the human condition insofar as many of us will
ingly engage in potentially self-destructive behaviors. Doodlebug, for bet
ter or worse, may be the most Freudian of Nolan’s films as subconscious
 motivations lead one to self-destructive behavior; but the larger existen
tial question of whether we have such motivations, and whether the be
havior they induce may be rational at times, unavoidably challenges
 viewers’ presumptions through Nolan’s provocative imagery.
 Following (1998) is Nolan’s first feature-length film and extends the
 thesis of Doodlebug to the level of a man who unwittingly participates in
 his own downfall. The narrative has expanded, however, to show the
 audience a bit more of what motivates the pre-fallen protagonist. Primar
ily, what’s at issue is a need to belong, to be involved in others’ lives as a
 way of affirming the validity of one’s own existence. Whether Nolan had
 ever read Martin Buber (1878–1965) or not, it’s clear that he shares Bu
ber’s fundamental thesis that I exist fully only with respect to a Thou who
 acknowledges my existence as such and vice versa. There’s an inherent 
danger in such co-dependency as it may devolve into a perverse master/
 slave dialectic; although, even in such a relationship, according to Georg
 Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel (1770–1831), the master is just as dependent on
 the slave as the reverse. In the case of Cobb and The Young Man, howev
er, the former functions as a master manipulator who doesn’t have any
 need of the latter and can easily disappear into the crowd as if he never
 existed. All of which raises the question of whether Cobb ever really
 existed; perhaps The Young Man is truly an extension of the self-destruc
tive protagonist in Doodlebug.
 Self-identity persists as a central organizing theme in Nolan’s next
 and more widely-distributed film, Memento (2000). Here, Nolan com
pletely disrupts the protagonist Leonard Shelby’s sense of identity and
 creates a situation in which he must create meaning for his existence—
 otherwise, why not squash himself as in Doodlebug. Leonard’s need to
 affirm his self-identity, though, comes at the cost of sacrificing others’
 identity—particularly that of Teddy or any other putative “John G.” who
 happens to cross his path. Ironically, though, by eliminating Teddy, Leo
nard has inadvertently created the conditions of his own existential de
mise, since the narrative Teddy had helped Leonard construct is what
 gave meaning to his existence. Without the telos—to use the classical
 Greek term—of finding and killing John G., there’s no further purpose to
 Leonard’s existence to guide his moral choices. By killing the only John
 G. to whom the “facts” he’s tattooed on his body have led him, Leonard
 has only succeeded in squashing his own identity and sense of purpose.
 Insomnia (2002) pushes further this question of one’s moral telos by
 forcing its protagonist, Will Dormer, to question his motivations in kill
ing his partner, who was on the verge of exposing his duplicitousness.
 Eschewing the pat ethical questions of whether Dormer was justified or
 not in the decisions he made, Nolan is more interested in the moral
 psychology of a person who must learn how to live with the decisions he’s
 made—good or bad. Is Dormer so different from the murderer Walter
 Finch? Is Dormer’s death actually a release for him from his own moral
 compromises? Having squashed himself morally, and in the process
 ruined his reputation as a police detective who’s imprisoned dozens of
 criminals who may now go free, physical death becomes not so much a
 punishment for Dormer but an escape.
 The Prestige (2006) takes the questions of self-identity and moral jus
tification raised in Nolan’s earlier films and doubles them—literally—by
 crafting two protagonists, both illusionists, who use duplicity as their
 stock-and-trade not only on the stage but in their personal lives as well.
 At this point, Nolan is perhaps becoming a bit self-conscious as a film
maker, whose personal philosophy might start being reflected in the the
matic elements of the films he’s creating. Although one suspects that
 Nolan wouldn’t go to the immoral extremes to which Angier goes in
 order to succeed in his “transported man” illusion; nevertheless, the film
 maker and the showmanhavethe shared goal of mesmerizing their audi
ence and provoking them to consider possibilities they hitherto haven’t
 imagined. Once again, self-destruction is the overarching theme as Angi
er allows himself to be killed night after night in order to make his trick
 work and triumph over his rival, Borden. The latter, or at least one of
 them, willingly sacrifices himself so that he may gain his ultimate re
venge against Angier.
 Nolan arguably reaches the apex of his skeptical approach to reality
 and self-identity with Inception (2010). Far from a simple redux of the
 Wachowksi Bros.’ Matrix trilogy, Nolan trades on something human be
ings phenomenally experience every night: dreaming. Ever since René
 Descartes’s so-called “dream argument” in the seventeenth century, phi
losophers have endeavored to define epistemic criteria to differentiate
 what we can trust to be real versus what may be a construction of one’s
 own mind. Relatedly, moral theorists have debated the extent to which
 one’s perception of reality may be more subjectively valuable than what is
 truly real. Does it really matter to Dom Cobb whether the top continues
 spinning at the end of the film? Having perhaps lost the ability to distin
guish dream from reality, it may not matter to Cobb anymore whether his
 “real” self has been squashed, so long as he’s able to enjoy the “reality”
 he most ardently desires: being home with his children, or at least per
ceiving himself to be.
 Nolan’s Dark Knight trilogy—Batman Begins (2005), The Dark Knight
 (2008), The Dark Knight Rises (2012)—revolutionized how moviegoers per
ceive their comic-book superheroes. Of course, the scripts for these films
 are based upon the comic books that created the morally ambiguous
 characters Nolan puts on the screen. Nevertheless, the performances No
lan drew out of Christian Bale, Heath Ledger, Tom Hardy, and others
 crafted a world in which the moral motivations and personal identity
 struggles of both protagonists and antagonists are all too evident and
 relatable to audiences. Yes, the Joker is a morally reprehensible figure; but
 howdifficult is it to argue with his—and Thomas Hobbes’s (1588–1679)—
 characterization of human society when one introduces “a little an
archy”? While Nolan was more peripherally involved with Man of Steel
 (as a writer and producer) and Batman v Superman (as an executive pro
ducer), viewers can nevertheless expect the same sort of conscience
pricking moral questions that his Dark Knight films raise: How far is one
 willing to go to ensure their own and their loved ones’ safety and security
 whenconfronted with injustice? Do our heroes, if truly they be such, owe
 the rest of us the sacrifice of their lives, whether literally or by sacrificing
 their own self-interest and chance at happiness?
 This brings us to Interstellar, arguably Nolan’s most triumphant film
 that encapsulates all the themes of his previous work. Personal identity?
 They are us. Moral choice? The fate of loved ones versus the human race.
 Epistemology? What we know versus what we don’t know in the black depths
 of Gargantua. And the perfect melding of philosophy and science: The
 physics and metaphysics of hyperspace and time. Nolan also takes audiences
 beyond the realm of self-interest—parents are “ghosts” of their children’s
 future—while also maintaining the irreducible value of personal I/Thou
 relationships—hence why Dr. Mann is ultimately a villain and Cooper a
 hero. Mann, along with Prof. Brand, is willing to squash his humanity in
 order to save the human race “as a species.” Cooper, through his attach
ment to particular others—most notably his daughter, Murph—willingly
 sacrifices himself to the unknown depths of a black hole. While Cooper
 doesn’t allow himself to be potentially squashed by Gargantua’s tremen
dous gravity out of some existential angst, as is apparently the case in
 Doodlebug, Nolan has nevertheless extended his ever-present thesis that
 sometimes the end of oneself is actually a beginning.
 No one book can adequately capture the philosophical richness of
 Nolan’s cinematic contribution to our collective pop culture conscious
ness. We’ve strived, however, to highlight key themes that define partic
ular Nolan films, as well as point out broader themes that cross through
out his work as a whole. If you haven’t watched any of Nolan’s films
 referenced herein, you should do so before you’re spoiled any further!
 Andif you haven’t read any of the philosophers referenced herein, you’ll
 be richly rewarded by investing the time to understand the various theo
ries that may help us discover fundamental truths about human nature,
 reality, morality, and the future in store for us